Hi, I'm Robert Krulwich.
Radiolab is supported by Squarespace launching their new campaign.
Make your next move, make your next move and set new goals for this year.
Lock down your next move idea with a unique domain and create a website to
launch today by using offer code Radiolab for 10% off your first purchase of a
Squarespace domain or website.
Make your next move with Squarespace more@squarespace.com
hey, I'm Janet. Boom. Rod. I'm Robert Krulwich.
This is Radiolab and our topic today is totally tubers. Yeah, yeah, totally.
And when you call it what you want, it doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter because the topic is tumors, famous tumors,
and our next and final tumor related Dale is one.
I've been wanting to do this particular tumor story for a forever for like two
years ago, I think. Oh, longer than that. Yeah.
It's a story that comes from a friend of mine, Rebecca Skloot.
You want me to talk? Make noise? That's her. Like we can move me closer.
She's a journalist and she has been wanting to tell this story even longer since
she was in the womb and she had been researching the story for 10 years. Hello,
hello, hello.
And she just wrote a book called the immortal life of Henrietta lacks and,
and the story. Okay. It's about a tumor that expands and never stops.
Begins in 1950 a black woman in Baltimore is in her bathroom and she discovers
pretty much all on her own that she has cancer. Um, it's all,
it's a little bit of a mystery how she initially knew this,
but she knew it was there.
[inaudible]
and not she called it.
She had told to her cousins for a while that she thought there was something
wrong with her, with her womb,
and she climbed into her bathtub and she slid her fingers up inside of herself
and found this lump chapter one first.
She went into her local doctor.
I happened to be an attending at that time.
The guy she eventually ended up seeing at Johns Hopkins University was this
fellow Dr. Howard Jones.
This, I'm 98. Next month I'll be 99.
Wow. So when she came in to see you,
can you tell me anything about what she was like?
Well, she was a uh, uh,
okay.
You didn't remember anything? No, I really don't. But you remember her tumor,
right? Well, absolutely. I never saw anything like it before or after
[inaudible]
and this doesn't look like a normal tumor. It was,
it was deep purple and about as big as a quarter,
I'm sort of shiny or soft. That was another thing about it on examination,
slightly raised and you touched it, you might think it was a red Jello.
There was something very strange about the way it looked
[inaudible]
so doctors took a sample? Yeah.
So they would cut off these little teeny tiny pieces of really small bite or two
and they would take a piece,
put it in a tube and one would go to the lab for diagnosis. And in this case,
since it was Hopkins,
they would take an extra piece and give it to a man named George Guy
to too. So George Guy was a researcher who worked at Hopkins.
He had a deal with the clinic that anytime they got a patient with cervical
cancer, they'd give him a tiny piece of the tumor. What he really wanted to do.
His main mission, actually not just his scientists everywhere,
we're trying to do this.
They wanted to find a way to grow human cells outside of a human being in a
dish, in a dish. George Guy had been trying to do this,
working on this for decades and why exactly. Um, it's sort of like,
it's sort of like having a little tiny bit of a person in a,
in a lab that's detached from them so that you can do whatever you want with
them. You know,
you can't bombard some person with a bunch of drugs and just wait to see how
much they can tolerate before their cells all explode.
But you can do that in cell culture. So, oh, so this is like,
this is like the basic thing. You need to study human biology.
You need cells in a dish. Yes.
Problem was anytime they tried to grow human cells in a dish,
my dog, they would die. Yeah, they die.
This is George Guy's former lab assistant. Can you just tell me your name?
You know, my name is so and so. My name is Mary.
I'll put my maiden name in there. Oh sure. Toy Cooper cheque.
Mary lives just outside of Baltimore.
About an hour from where she used to work with George guys. This is Dr. Guy.
Show me some pictures and he's sitting at at a microscope we can have, he looks,
he seems like a really big guy, like a really tall guy. He was a big guy.
At least six, five judging from the picture. Yeah, he was.
And in every slide that she showed me, he had kind of a crazy smile on his face.
Like he's got a like he's having a good time. Bear of a man.
That's what I always thought. Oh yeah. In any case,
Mary says they were completely stumped at why the human cells always died,
but they just did. Yeah. So on the day that George Guy Walked in,
handed Mary two was a little chunk of a nameless women cervical cancer inside.
I knew nothing about her. No one expected any.
No, he was doing that. Well, he probably, yeah, always ever hopeful,
but you know, I was eating lunch and I thought, oh, the heck with it. You know,
it's not going to grow. I'm going to finish the sandwich. Yeah,
and that's what I did
three then I went in and she gave the, sell some food,
get my usual turn on all the machines and left,
came back the next day they hadn't died,
so she came back the next day and they were growing and then the next day still
growing. They just kept
lagging alone in the next drew a lot.
Rebecca says they doubled in size every 24 hours. Yeah. They just grew.
All of a sudden, you know, I kept transferring them, making more tubes,
transferring them, making more tubes to transferring.
They weren't very reliable and stronger.
They just kept plugging along and alone. Meanwhile,
the woman had spawned all these cells, died right.
Officially she died of uremia,
which is a like toxicity of the blood because she wasn't able to get rid of the
toxic waste. That usually goes out in your urine log, in the log in the wall,
but herself and to college.
This story is a privilege to introduce Dr. George.
Guy Wasn't long after the George Guy appeared on TV holding in his hand a little
bottle? No. Let me show you a bottle, like an alarm,
which we have grown my fifth quantity of catheter style.
So did you want to look at the photos?
You can't really get a sense of how aggressive this tumor was until you go to
the Hopkins Archives and looked at George guy's pictures and videos. Okay,
this is Ken here to heal a cell phone. Then it hits you,
but you're at a large 10,000 times. Oh my God.
Swirling hurricanes of cells.
Tuesday thousands hi Raul.
And some very large together.
Kept transferring them and making more to think them under the mic.
Looks like something is just exploded. They're going to be,
she's getting bigger, bigger and strong. It's indestructable,
it's indescribable. Nothing can stop me.
Why? Hers just sort of took off and grew.
And the other ones that they had tried before,
it didn't is just a little bit of a mystery. Nobody really knows four,
unless George Guy knew what he had.
This new cell line was what they'd all been waiting for. So early on,
right after this woman died,
George Guy sent Mary back down to get more cancer cells from the [inaudible].
Oh he sent me down to the morgue. Yeah. Really? Oh yeah.
So I went down there and um, the uh, coroner, I don't know who he was.
Dr God was there too and they were standing down at her feet sort of. Yeah.
Meanwhile, she's like, she's lying out there. She's already open.
I got some samples. Coroner would take them out and getting a, Timmy,
what'd she look like? I couldn't look at her face. I couldn't look at her.
The only thing I looked at were her toes and they had chipped nail Polish on
them. And that was really like, oh this is a real person.
What was it about the nail Polish that hit you? Oh cause it was chipped.
Cause you know that she hadn't been able to take care of her nails for a long
time if they got shipped like that.
And it's showed that she was proud of herself.
Not everyone wears nail Polish on their toes. Yeah.
Over the next several months. Wow.
This woman's body laid decomposing in the ground,
George Guy and Mary produced hundreds of thousands of herself or tumor cells and
he named them the heela strain.
Heela like Hella h e l a [inaudible].
No one would actually know why he had named them that for about two decades.
But what he did with these cells, you know, would be unusual nowadays.
Like if somebody now found a cell that was special,
they'd run off to the patent office and then sell it to Merck for 1 billion
bucks. But George Guy, hey, just pass them out freely.
Didn't try and make any money off a nice,
nice new thing that could help science Mary,
that George Guy began to send Hilo all over the world. Yep.
And pretty soon she was in hundreds of labs and you know,
this was in the midst of the polio epidemic. Even when polio was at its worst,
we're talking early fifties right? Yeah. So there's 1951 52 you know,
schools are being closed, kids are being kept inside
today's cruel disease. Medical science still has no complete onset.
There was this enormous effort to develop a polio vaccine.
Problem was in order to develop a vaccine, you had to have enough polio virus,
you know enough quantity to be able to study it in the lab.
And they had no way of making enough. So whether they do, well, one of the guys,
that guy, one of the guys that guy had sent the sales to this collaborated,
your friend of guys discovered something kind of amazing,
which was that polio loved the heela sell,
put polio inside a Hilo cell healer would copy and in the process make more
polio. So which the Super Xerox cell, no matter what you want to do,
like make a copy, make a copy, make a copy. Yeah.
So now they had a way of making polio either could just be a polio factory.
And so the government made a factory at the Tuskegee Institute. A real one.
Literally a factory. So they had
these big, you know,
stainless steel of that sort of culture medium that were sort of rotated
constantly autoclaves for sterilizing all their equipment over with five
microscopes, crazy frankensteinish gizmos.
They had this machine,
it was like an automatic cell dispenser and it had this organ,
one mechanical arm in squirt a certain amount of this cultural medium filled
with Hilo selves into it too. Wow. This is like a beauty of industry right here.
Yeah, it is. It absolutely. The cells that were produced at this factory,
she says, we used to test the polio vaccine vaccine to rub them.
They'd rather do the, the test that they were doing in Norris.
It was the largest field trial ever done at its peak. The
Test Kayla
production center was producing about 6 trillion cells a week. Wow. Um,
which is kind of inconceivable,
but that was actually only the beginning says Rebecca,
because this factory led to an even bigger one. It was for profit. Right.
And that second factory was the first time any human biological material was
commercialized. So this was the first biotech company? Yeah. Basically. Okay.
When they first started mass producing Hilo,
what sorts of things were done to these sales?
What sort of sort of problems were investigated?
Like anything that you can imagine? Yeah,
so they infected the Hilo cells with every kind of virus and hepatitis e coin
and cephalitis virus, yellow fever, herpes, measles, mumps, rabies, whatever.
Like you, just any, any banks. And this was just,
and it's as a revolution for scientists and research on chemotherapy drugs.
He was, cells went up and some of the first space missions. Really? Yeah.
So they were, ula went into space, into space.
And every time I hear what I think of it like Beulah in despair,
why?
I mean just because the premise was to see what happens to human cells in zero
gravity. You know, if we're going to be sending people up
into space, what's going to happen to them up there?
So Hilo went up before any humans did. Um, and then she eventually went up his,
she the cells there was actually interesting little slip up.
Yeah, I know.
Okay.
So let's actually skip forward in the story to the point where that that slip
up,
you just heard that pronoun confusion gets personal,
you know. Well what happened? Okay,
it's a late sixties and a Hilo has it led to a revolution in science and now
there are hundreds of cell lines,
not just Hilo but hundreds and somewhere along the way scientists discover that
hula is so aggressive that she's actually been contaminating and taking over all
of these other cell lines where you just said she, but I get your point and she,
she does it in the way it does it in the strangest way. Cells can,
you know, they can float on dust particles. They can write
what they can float on dust particles. Yeah. So they can,
you mean they can hop out of addition, just get on a particle and just float
out the door, the stairs down the hall,
one Hilo Cell into a lab rops into,
into a dish cell culture where there's other cells growing. And because he was
cells are sort of powerful cells they take over.
So on the heels of this catastrophe, someone at Hopkins decides to make a test.
Let's make a test that will allow us to genetically determine if a cell is heela
or if it is. And to make a long story short, this desire for a genetic test,
lead scientists and then journalists to ask a question, which is
amazingly, for 25 years, had not been asked who was this woman?
And that's when we found out her name Henrietta lacks.
This is the sound of Rebecca Reading Henrietta's medical records for the first
time.
This is a 30 year old colored woman she's sitting with.
Henry had his youngest daughter, Deborah, 2nd of November.
So this is again when she was pregnant with you and Rhiana had five kids when
she died at the age of 31 most have no memory of her because they were too
young. And that's especially true of Debbie.
That was only 15 months old and I don't remember anything about my mother.
Yeah. So she, you know, she,
she had spent her entire life just sort of longing to know who her mother was.
And did she like dancing? You know,
I always wanted to know what she liked to do, what she went,
where she liked to eat. Did she breastfeed Debra?
She was really sort of almost fixated on that idea.
She wanted to know if she was breasted.
Oh I don't know. You know, I don't know what I would give up just to,
just to have her heads, hey
to see her in a whole her.
So in 19 three when a scientist calls the lacks family and Deborah hears that
little bits of the mother that she never knew are still alive and oh by the way,
can we take a blood test from you and your family?
Cause we're having some contamination problem. We need these genetic markers,
Blah Blah Blah. Well, as you could imagine, tell me about the prize.
It really did. It was really confusing. I mean, how much is the,
how much of a is out there? You know, eventually she went online,
did some searches and found thousands and thousands of hits. Like for instance,
on Heela clones. And Debra had heard, you know,
various journalists in the past had come to her and mentioned, you know,
dolly the clone sheep and said, you know your mom,
they did this with your mom too.
Meaning that's actually where the technology started.
The first cells that are cloned were heela cells,
but that was just cloning a cell, not cloning an entire being.
That distinction is very complicated,
particularly for somebody who doesn't know what a cell is. Yeah. So Deborah,
between what journalists had told her and googling Henrietta lacks and clone
thought there were thousands of clones of her mother around. And really,
you mean like a bunch of Henrietta's walking the streets, walking around.
Rebecca says that one of Deborah's biggest fears was bumping into one of these
clones. She said, you know, she would say,
I would have to go talk to her and she wouldn't know that I was her daughter
and, and, and I don't know that I could handle that. Wow.
It sounds so fantastical. Like,
how could someone believe that there are copies of her mother walking around,
but at one point 25 years after their mother died, someone called and said, Hey,
part of her still alive, and you know,
we've grown enough of her so that it could wrap around the earth several times.
At that point, all bets are off. Yeah, right, exactly.
Not to mention that it's actually not that crazy because your DNA is in your
cells. So if your cells are taken out of you and they still grow,
well, isn't that still you?
Hey
alive. It's of you, but it's clearly not you and any, it's going on and on.
That's, it's a funny middle space, that's for sure. Yeah.
So here's what happened is Rebecca went off in search of Henrietta lacks.
Every so often Deborah would come along and sit with her as they interviewed,
you know, anyone they could find friends, family, and eventually over many,
many years, the picture does emerge
of who this woman was. She was born in, in Roanoke,
1920 Virginia and I think she was the 10th of the 11 children.
But apparently she was the one that stood out.
Everybody talked about her as just being, you know, she was the cat.
Oh my goodness. I don't think I could top her.
This is Sadie Sturdivan Henrietta's cousin, right?
What's a beautiful girl? I was the for myself, but hint,
it was very pretty name brand. [inaudible].
Okay. And this is Henrietta's sister Gladys Knight and complacent.
Everyone that they spoke with zeroed in on the same few points.
Like first she was really meticulous about her nails, always painted them red.
It's very deep. Red. And Henrietta just had this,
she was very strength, forthright, very Sassy,
like herselves. Now the unfortunate thing is that when it comes to her life,
you know how she lived. There's not a ton of detail.
Right? October.
So this is when she first went in with her cancer in that hotel room,
and the two of them were flipping through the medical records.
They did start to get some detail
about how she died. Things I want to take notes tonight.
Was she in a lot of pain when she died? This was the hardest thing.
She was eventually in an unbelievable amount of pain,
complains of pain in the right lower quadrant, wheeling and,
and crying and you know, moaning for the Lord to help her.
And according to the records, doctors tried everything. Morphine,
they injected a hundred percent alcohol straight into her spine.
Wow. The pain spite of the alcohol injection last week.
And she would have these fits of pain
[inaudible]
to spasms where this waves of pain would hit her and she would rise up out of
the bed and thrash around.
So they strapped her to the bed and her sister will,
along with one of her friends,
you know,
one of them would tighten the straps and the other one would put a pillow in her
mouth so that she wouldn't bite her tongue
if I only just had the chair. So take care of her
now dealing with how her mother died was one thing,
but the cells made it more complicated. Whatever of her,
her mother was alive in these cells somehow. So if that's true,
that left very big questions.
And the first of them for Deborah was how can Henrietta rest in peace if part of
her with part of her soul is being, you know,
shot up to the moon and injected with all these chemicals and radiated and
bombarded.
Painful. No one, you know,
they had whole shells on the back of a donkey going to Turkey,
you know, and the airplanes just going all over the world.
Uh, I just don't know.
You know, she worried about them. She worried that it hurt her mother.
When you infect the cells with Ebola,
does somehow her mother feel the pain that comes with Ebola and had a scientist
that were like sat down with her?
I mean just explained to her like this is no, never,
nothing cause it spread.
It just strikes me that it wouldn't be that hard to explain it.
Like when you take cells out of a body,
it's kind of like when you cut your fingernail off, it just doesn't,
but your fingernail doesn't keep growing and living after you cut it off.
It's a, it's really hard.
There is no other example of some way that you can take something from someone's
body and have it keep living and not have a person feel it and all these worries
says her Baga began to build and Deborah's mind and build and build
there came at this point. So we were at her cousin's house,
this her cousin Gary,
she was broken out in hives and she was telling him all the stuff that she'd
recently learned. You can almost hear it on the tape. She says to him,
the one of the there,
she can't carry the burden of these cells anymore if she can't
do it, I don't want to. [inaudible]
and I had been sort of trying to talk her down and he was trying to talk her
down
[inaudible]
and then just out of nowhere, he just started
singing
[inaudible]
[inaudible] [inaudible]
Ooh.
[inaudible]. I know those [inaudible]
and he started preaching thing that came that he held her head in his hands
and we come to you tonight,
the author and the finish of our faith and we thank you for being awaiting mic.
You made a path in the middle. You're called the Milton's,
the skip Lego rams and [inaudible].
We thank you to that. Thank you all. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Jesus.
Hey Man. Hey Man. [inaudible] great.
[inaudible] great.
And she just relaxed.
He like him, man. I feel like, Huh?
She didn't realize it then, but that night Debra was on the verge of a stroke
one walk up into the building my wall. Okay.
You mean he said it's just up this hill. Yeah.
One of the most striking moments of this story is when the two of them visit
Hopkins, I feel. Yeah, a bit.
And Debra meets her mother's cells for the first time.
I should have, I'll show you that Jerome, and I can show you that sound okay.
Because the scientists had finally contacted her. Christoph Lingara,
the scientist who invited us into his lab to see the cells.
He had projected them onto a screen
bit confused. They look green here. Okay.
There's so neon green in this particular,
hi, I'm Robert Krulwich.
Radiolab is supported by Squarespace launching their new campaign.
Make your next move. Make your next move and set new goals for this year.
Lock down your next move idea with a unique domain and create a website to
launch today by using offer code radio lab for 10% off your first purchase of a
Squarespace domain or website. Make your next move with Squarespace
more@squarespace.com
I'm Janet. Boom. Rod. I'm Robert Krulwich.
This is radio lab and our topic today is totally tubers. Yeah, yeah.
Well you call it what you want. It doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter because the topic is tumors,
famous tumors and our next and final tumor related Dale is one.
I've been wanting to do this particularly tumor story for forever,
for floor like two years ago, I think. Oh, longer than that. Yeah.
It's a story that comes from a friend of mine, Rebecca Skloot.
You want me to talk? Make noise? That's her.
I think we can move me closer to him.
She's a journalist and she has been wanting to tell this story even longer since
she was in the womb. I mean, she has been researching the story for 10 years.
Hello? Hello. I know.
And she just wrote a book called the immortal life of Henrietta lacks and in the
story, okay, it's about a tumor that expands and never stops.
Begins in 1950,
a black woman in Baltimore is in her bathroom and she discovers pretty much all
on her own that she has cancer. Um, it's all,
it's a little bit of a mystery how she initially knew this,
but she knew it was there.
[inaudible]
I not, she called it. She had told that her cousins for a while,
that she thought there was something wrong with her, with her womb,
and she climbed into her bathtub and she slid her fingers up inside of herself
and found this lump chapter one first.
She went into her local doctor.
By chance I happened to be an attending at that time.
The guy she eventually ended up seeing at Johns Hopkins University,
who was this fellow, Dr. Howard Jones,
this, I'm 98. Next month I'll be 99.
Wow. So when she came in to see you,
can you tell me anything about what she was like, well, shoot.